---
title: The Academic Field That Has Developed Since The 1960S
---

--title: "The academic field that has developed since the 1960s,"
description: "The academic field that has developed since the 1960s,"
--primarily in North American colleges and universities, to study and teach written language, emphasizing the centrality of writing and literate practices to intellectual development, learning, and critical thought;
to the rhetorical construc-tion and negotiation of knowledge, culture, and personal identity; and to democratic partic-ipation, power, and work in an
"information society." No brief definition can capture the com-plexity and indeterminacy of composition stud-ies in its current stage of development. Basic questions that define a discipline—subject mat-ter, methods, purpose, and more—remain in dispute, as suggested by the lack of consensus on a name for the field. "Composition studies"
is known under many variants that express overlapping and competing conceptions of the field, each drawing its boundaries and organ-izing its scholarly work somewhat differently in relation to overarching interdisciplinary projects, research programs, intellectual tradi-tions, and cognate disciplines. Probably the most well accepted designation pairs "compo-sition" with "rhetoric," in either order: "com-position and rhetoric" or
"rhetoric/composi-tion." This doublet is conveniently ambiguous regarding the meanings and relations of its con-stituents, which John Gage characterizes as polysemous terms ("On 'Rhetoric' and 'Com-position,'" Lindemann and
Tate 15–32). Only half seriously (and not exhaustively),
he iden-tifies for the two terms at least twenty-seven de-notations organized into five categories and concludes that their relation must necessarily be coordinate,
referencing a complex network of differences, overlaps,
and linkages. When conjoined with "composition,"
"rhe-toric" is generally understood as the broader field of subject matter. But many who locate themselves professionally in composition studies (by belonging to organizations like "4Cs"—the Conference on College
Composition and Com-munication—by teaching writing,
graduate com-position theory, or rhetoric, and by publishing in its major journals) identify their intellectual pro-jects with a variety of broader knowledge en-terprises besides or instead of rhetoric. These include, for instance, literacy, linguistics, or dis-course studies; cultural studies; English; English education; and communication. Phrases that qualify or modify any of the variants (such as basic writing, advanced composition,
the disciplines, contrastive rhetoric, history of rhetoric, African-American rhetoric) delineate specialized areas of contemporary composition and rhetoric. In many cases, however, such as technical communication, these are not true branches but semiautonomous formations rooted partly or even primarily in disciplines and teaching practices other than college composition. College composition itself (originally
"freshman English"), once isomorphic with the whole field, is now only one focus within rhetoric and composition, which has become progressively more intertwined with multiple, parallel,
or transdisciplinary studies of discourse. The names of academic fields, like place names, often reveal complex histories of influence and affiliation, as does the common use of metaphors for the interdisciplinarity of composition: Colonization, immigration, separation and reunification, borrowing, and cultural exchanges. Composition studies as a contemporary discipline is conventionally dated to 1963,
when calls for the revival of rhetoric (at the
1963 4Cs) and for research into composing
(Richard Braddock et al., Research in Written
Composition) sparked new scholarship in writing. In the 1970s, published research and theory began to achieve a critical mass (spurred in part by Janet Emig's exemplary case study, The

--## Section 2

Composing Processes of Twelfth-Graders) and to produce structures of professionalization like tenure-track appointment lines in composition,
graduate programs, and sustained research programs, accompanied by new journals, increased access to publishing channels in both the humanities and the social sciences, and, in the
1980s, tenure and promotion for college faculty in composition and rhetoric. These developments were accompanied by an increasingly self-conscious and confident articulation of the process and goals of forming a new discipline. The claims for a "new paradigm" that accompanied and drove this process obscured,
however, the way that the composition revolution brought into uneasy coalition the motives,
ideas, and values of at least three major traditions:
1. The teaching tradition in American col-leges and universities, associated since the nineteenth century with practical tasks of remediating literacy crises, pre-paring citizens, training the work force, and otherwise serving the needs of soci-ety and of students. Its orientation to service can also be interpreted as a moral commitment to democratic literacy stretching back to Colonial times.
This tradition makes undergraduate, gradu-ate, or professional composition instruc-tion historically and contemporaneously continuous with the teaching of English and language arts in American elemen-tary and secondary schools. Early re-formers, however, identified the teaching tradition primarily with the formalist
"current-traditional rhetoric" of fresh-man English textbooks and classroom exercises, focused on textual products and correctness in grammar and style. 2. A
revived and revised rhetorical tradi-tion, whose renaissance was to energize development of a new rhetoric.
From this perspective, composition is the in-heritor of classical Western rhetoric as a comprehensive humanistic study of lan-guage use and an integrative system of education in the liberal arts. 3. A proposed, parallel new science in-tended to study the processes of compos-ing,
drawing on methodologies and ap-proaches from psychology,
linguistics, education, and other social sciences. The composition revolution, while strong-ly motivated by pedagogical goals, viewed teaching practice as the relatively passive object that the new rhetoric and the new science were to transform or, indeed, replace through a har-monious alliance of empirical and interpretive methods (research and theory). The amalgamation of these three traditions within modern composition studies left a dual legacy: On the one hand, the perspectival rich-ness of what is often called an inherently "in-terdisciplinary"
or "multimodal" discipline, and, on the other, a set of fundamental conflicts at the heart of the discipline.
These new begin-nings sowed in composition studies the seeds of fragmentation and discord, institutionalizing from its disparate sources what has been called the
"conflict of methods" between the interpre-tive fields (the hermeneutical human sciences) and the empirical sciences,
to which must be added the analytic-critical studies (for example, structuralism, critical social science, cultural critique) and their adaptation to pursuing schol-arship as a form of political action. By appeal-ing to such a range of intellectual traditions for key concepts and models of scholarship, re formers set a precedent for unconstrained borrowing and blending of methods and perspectives, not only from the original sources but from any other that appeared relevant. And in setting out to transform a teaching practice (not sufficiently recognized as a complex intellectual tradition in its own right) by developing and systematically applying new, rational un--## Section 3

derstandings of writing and of pedagogy, the founders of composition studies built into its structure a theory/practice dichotomy that continues to haunt its discourse and practices. From the
1960s to the present, much of the content of composition scholarship can be assimilated to the metagoal of rationally defining a discipline and legitimizing its intellectual work
(and its practitioners) within the academy. This quest forms such a powerful and explicit context that almost any inquiry may be seen (or see itself) as responding, directly or indirectly, to a set of defining metaquestions and topics concerning the nature and responsibilities of the field. Theorists sought to identify or provide for composition a set of features that would demarcate, stabilize, and sustain composition studies as a knowledge enterprise. Among the features that have been proposed as essential to this project are the following: an inexhaustible topic or subject matter; relevance to broader knowledge enterprises and cultural developments;
collaboration and intellectual exchange with cognate disciplines; a focused mission or purpose; methods and cross-methodological standards for evaluating scholarship and teaching;
professional and institutional structures; a system for reproducing the discipline (that is, educating the next generation of scholars); and a reflexive (ironic) understanding of its own projects and discourse (thus, reflective subfields addressing the discipline itself, including historical studies, a body of criticism, sociological and rhetorical studies of the field, and so on). Surprisingly,
despite the pervasiveness of this theme in composition studies, there are still remarkably few sustained treatments that directly address or characterize the discipline globally as an intellectual domain, either historically or analytically (see Berlin, North, and
Phelps for book-length works). The problem of comprehensively describing the field has most frequently been handled in an anthological or summative fashion, for example, in introductions written for graduate students like that of
Lindemann and Tate, or in collections of bibliographical essays like that of Moran and Lunsford. Perhaps the most influential general char-acterizations are found in essays or longer works that attempt to map the schools or per-spectives of the discipline (discussed below).
Initially, the drive to conceptualize and establish a new field produced strong pressures and expectations for unity. Many sought to identify or formulate frameworks to provide coherence for the remarkably diverse work that began to appear, representing differences in fo-cus (for example, writers, readers, texts, dis-course processes,
discourse events, linguistic, cognitive, or social structures, material context, ideology) and, even more significantly, in meth-ods, underlying visions, and values.
The generativity of this period created a brief euphoria,
in which claims for an unified theory seemed intoxicatingly persuasive, as both the instru-ment for seeking disciplinary status and the likely outcome of this struggle. The rapid professionalization of composition—a largely successful effort to establish the field as autono-mous and intellectually viable within the acad-emy—seemed identical with the achievement of a new conceptually unified field (see Maxine Hairston's widely cited article "The Winds of Change: Thomas Kuhn and the

--## Section 4

Revolution in the Teaching of Writing," College
Composition and Communication 33 [1982]: 76 –88). This optimism has been tempered in the later 1980s and 1990s,
despite continuing ef-forts by some scholars to promulgate a single paradigm (for example, cognitive rhetoric or social-epistemic rhetoric) to contain, overcome, or displace conflicting ones. Once established, the
"discipline" began to crack and fissure, or more accurately to reveal the fractures that had been there all along, by virtue of its three tra-ditions and its interdisciplinary eclecticism of ideas and methods.
Subsequent consideration has discovered these traditions to be not only problematically compatible but far more com-plex and internally divided than was realized. (For example, the teaching tradition is not ac-counted for simply as the instantiation of cur-rent-traditional rhetoric; it also incorporates an enduring minority intellectual tradition, Ro-manticism, associated with progressive educa-tion, New Criticism, and the
"expressivist" school of composition. The teaching of writing is also strongly linked, through the schools, to the social science paradigm of education re-search, as represented, for example, in the jour-nal Research in
Teaching English.) The new rhetoric has turned into "new redescribed historical rhetoric as multivariate);
the new science has divided into qualitative,
quantitative, and cognitive (model-building)
camps, at the least. New positions have appeared that seem to fit none of these while they have influenced all (for example, feminism,
deconstruction, new historicism, critical pedagogy). The apparent incompatibility and incommensurability of methods and perspectives, and the increasing contentiousness among these points of view, have become highly salient and disturbing problems for the profession. In one useful simplification, composition studies may be understood as developing through a process of equilibration between forces of expansion and differentiation. These forces may be roughly equated with rhetoric and composition, respectively. For instance, the ancient provenance of rhetoric reconnects composition studies to European thought (particularly philosophy and poetics) and to the historical experience of rhetoric as a part of education and Western culture, while the range of cultures and contexts for language use addressed in contemporary rhetorical studies enables composition both to reconceive and escape the classroom as the sole scene of writing. (It can be argued that other fields or cross-disciplinary enterprises, such as linguistics or cognitive studies, broadly construed, have played a similarly expansive role for composition studies; it is only when these studies become rhetoricized, that is,
when they begin to address discourse as event and to study symbolic activity and meaning in context, that they approach the impact of rhetoric in this respect.) Composition provides a touchstone for differentiating the discipline from others by evoking the specifically American historical practice of teaching writing and language arts, an experiment in educating for mass literacy, as a basis for framing a distinctive set of problems and moral concerns, emphasizing certain purposes, contexts, and responsibilities.
Expansion
A striking characteristic of the twentieth-century development of composition and rhetoric,
and a major challenge to organizing it coherently, is the enormous expansion that has oc--## Section 5

curred in its subject matter, both denotatively
(the realities that terms like writing refer or point to) and connotatively (what they mean).
These changes understandably puzzle newcomers and outsiders, who continue to identify the teaching of writing with their memories or im-ages of "freshman
English" and the remediation of discrete skills even as they themselves are producing multimedia documents on their com-puters, struggling with an exponential increase in information, and negotiating new rhetorical genres. Any definition of the field must begin from and account for this augmented domain and ultimately find some principled way to navigate, if not delimit, it. The development of composition studies has occurred during a period of extraordinary, successive transformations in both the media and technologies of communication and, relatedly,
the way these (including language itself) are conceptualized in relation to information, meaning,
knowledge, mind, human develop-ment, culture, societal organization, and social activity. These changes took place against a tumultuous social context for American educa-tion, including events of such massive impact as wars, generational conflict, the collapse of com-munism,
restructuring of the global economy, the worldwide spread of increasingly interactive telecommunications, the feminist movement, civil rights, internationalization,
profound and still unfolding demographic shifts, and the re-definition of American society as multicultural. While the interactions between the internally motivated development of composition and different layers of this context are myriad, com-plex, and not easily understood, it is clear (as noted in a pioneering intellectual history of composition studies by Nystrand et al.) that the general impact has been to enable and require composition both to widen greatly the scope of its subject matter beyond what is convention-ally understood as "writing" and also to in-crease the depth of analysis in the form of more complex concepts of writing, teaching, and learning, and their relationship to individuals and to society. The following scenarios may give some inkling why these expansions are so com-prehensive and unconstrained. The first composition studies were under-taken in classroom settings, most often associ-ated with "freshman English."
If it is decided that to teach writing well requires an under-standing of composing as a process, the first target of analysis is likely to be (and was) stu-dent writing processes and student texts, along with related teaching acts. Quickly, however, attention turns to comparing student writing with adult, or expert, practices of writing. While these comparisons may originally be con fined to academic writing, they logically imply that the context for understanding student writing, and for teaching college writing, is necessarily teachers' knowledge about the entire world of adult discourse for which students are preparing. This insight (facilitated, as suggested,
by the appeal to rhetoric as encompassing the whole universe of discourse) licences composition and rhetoric to study writing in any context and for any purpose that adults use it. Such moves,
once made, generate their own intellectual momentum. For example,
"writing" is easily amplified to "literate practices" (that is, related verbal practices like talking about texts, electronic communication,
reading, and so on) or associated with other

--## Section 6

"literacies" (for example, "information literacy," "computer literacy," and "visual" or
"media literacy"). A focus on writing in actual practice invites compositionists to study and teach in contexts outside college writing classrooms: Academic writing as it takes place across the curriculum; rhetorical interactions in the workplaces of business, government, the professions, and other institutions and organizations;
literacy development and practices in culturally and linguistically diverse homes, in retirement homes, churches, prisons, political campaigns,
and so on. Many composition theorists, believing divisions based on rhetorical context, modality, and function to be arbitrary and unenforceable, define the scope of their subject to encompass, in time, the lifespan, and in space or function, any setting for strategic language use. (This means concretely, for example, that they include speech and reading in composition research and teaching; study how writing is learned, taught, and practiced at both pre- and postcollege levels; and incorporate into writing instruction all genres of discourse.) Scholars,
however, pragmatically recognize certain periods and settings (and purposes or modes of language) as historically thematic for composition while others are the traditional province of cognate disciplines like English education (reading),
literature, creative writing, early childhood education, (speech) communication, or linguistics.
In this sense constructing the discipline and determining its "borders" does not depend simply on the logic of subject matter but involves political negotiations of academic territory with competing fields. Another path of expansion leads composition studies to reconceptualize "writing" from a simple translating or coding function (turning thought into intelligible, socially acceptable lan-guage forms) to include a broad variety of in-teractive higher-order cognitive and social func-tions. Suppose one asks, what does it take to be successfully literate? To write effectively? The answer has changed dramatically since the
1960s as technologically sophisticated, infor-mation-rich societies require increasingly com-plex skills under the rubric of "literacies." The meaning of literacy is not fixed but changes in response to the requirements and opportunities of a particular society for handling informa-tion—that is, seeking out, selecting,
interpret-ing, and transforming meanings—through an evermore complex integration of multiple sym-bol systems and media. These integrations re-quire not only technical knowledge but also creative and critical intellectual skills like cat-egorizing, ordering, analogizing,
inferring, and evaluating. At the same time, research,
together with reflections on teaching experience, reveals the indeterminate range of implied competencies and knowledge that writers must coordinate (and therefore composition teachers must study and cultivate) to accomplish intellectual and rhetorical purposes: For example, critical rea-soning and logic,
problem-formulation, com-posing techniques like drafting and revision, electronic technologies for text production and information search, content knowledge, and social knowledge about audience and rhetori-cal genres. It is impractical for teachers of "writ-ing" to isolate these elements and teach them separately, or teach only a few of them. Examining writing as a technology reveals yet another scenario of expansion. Writing as a system of inscription has been the subject of intensive analysis,
for example, in Continental theories that argue for writing (over speech) as the general case for language or in sustained debates among linguists, psychologists, and classicists about the historical and developmen-tal role of literacy in promoting critical think-ing within different cultures. But while this has been going on, Western writing in the sense of an alphabetic inscription system has metamor-phosed from the technologies of handwriting and print to electronic documents that mix print forms of verbal language with images and sound (language, music) in multimedia formats (film, video, photography, sound recordings, computer animation, voice mail, and so forth).

--## Section 7

Practically speaking, writing teachers are now, or will in a world of telecommunications, where they conceive and inscribe ideas and manipulate information in forms that are not restricted to visual language. There is simply no way to keep separate and distinct the technologies people think of as "writing" (verbal symbols, visible language, print) from these other modes of inquiry, expression, and communication.
Achieving Disciplinarity through
Order and Difference
Once these expansions take place, it is extremely hard to circumscribe either the scholarship or the teaching and service responsibilities of composition studies, which seem to diffuse and merge with those of other fields. This inter penetration between composition studies and allied disciplines takes place not only on an intellectual plane (as research and theory broaden their scope and take on increasingly general issues) but also in a panoply of professional and institutional structures. The several levels of interaction between composition and other disciplines—in scholarship, teaching, and service—
both parallel and feed into one another. In writing-across-the-curriculum programs, for example, composition professionals cooperate with colleagues in other fields in a mission that is both teaching and service-oriented. In doing so they address not only the issue of teaching writing as a discipline-specific rhetoric but also the problem of teaching and learning any subject through the mediation of writing. This focus in turn broadens the scholarly interests of composition studies to include rhetorics of inquiry and forms of communication across disciplines and methodologies. All these relationships show up in the unpredictably interdisciplinary mix of faculty and courses in graduate programs preparing students for careers in rhetoric and composition studies and in the variety of programs and departments into which they are subsequently appointed. In sum, the very expansions and importations that give intellectual depth to composition and integrate it into broader knowledge enterprises also constantly threaten its viability and autonomy by producing confusion, conflict,
and a diffusion of purpose and professional identity. In response to this dilemma, scholars have constantly sought ways to order the apparent chaos of topic, methods, and values in composition and to differentiate it from other fields through a set of distinctive features or commonalities. Scholars have adopted a number of strat-egies to provide order to the discipline, which may be classified as strategies of dominance, of inclusion or pluralism, and of dialogue. Prob-ably the most common approach to organizing the discipline is "mapping." Early taxonomies (for example, those of James Moffett, James
Britton, and other discourse theorists) mapped the various aims, modes, or genres of discourse, extending the nineteenth-century tradition of such classifications.
James L. Kinneavy (A Theory of Discourse, 1980) provided the most comprehensively syntopical of these schemes,
many of which had considerable impact on pedagogy. More significant to the quest for disciplinarity, however, are efforts to map com-position studies itself into competing schools of thought or practice contrasting in methods,
theoretical stances, pedagogical strategies, sources, and other distinguishing features. Although much composition scholarship is argued in terms of underlying dichotomies

--## Section 8

(for example, cognitive versus social approaches to composing research, or expressionist versus new rhetorical pedagogies), the most influential maps have organized the work of the field into three or four holistic categories whose differ-ences are traced to a primary dimension of dif-ference such as epistemology or research method.
Prominent examples include the works of James Berlin and
Stephen North. Barbara Gleason and Mark Wiley
("Composition in Three Keys: Art, Nature, and Science,"
Ilha do Desterro 29 [1993]: 11 –25) summarize and discuss such strategic mapping while offering their own alternative, as does Nystrand et al. A related strategy is to organize the work of the field around key concepts,
which serve as generative metaphors. Examples of such con-cepts, or "god terms," that have been proposed (or opposed) as organizing terms for composi-tion include text,
process, symbolic act, trans-action, composing,
imagination, the making of meaning, and social context.
Many theoretical positions in composition may be understood as selecting one or another in a framework of dis-course elements (for example, the communica-tion triangle, or the Burkean pentad for analyz-ing symbolic acts) and arguing its primacy. As in the case of mapping,
conceptual analysis tends to produce master narratives that advance particular values by constructing a historical progression from a simpler, less adequate para-digm for composition studies to a more com-plex,
comprehensive one. Many recent accounts of composition studies, for instance, tend to propose or argue a historical sequence in emphasis from text to mind, or cognition to social context. Such schematic histories, however,
must be understood as interested and selective interpretations, hiding many complexities and ambiguities. (For example, the notion of "social context" may be variously and conflictingly interpreted to mean cognitive construct, ideology, discourse community, a condition of dialogue or Bakhtinian "heteroglossia," and so on.) Mapping and key concept analysis generally function as strategies of dominance in that they attempt to impose an unifying order on the discipline based on structural divisions and a hierarchy of value that have real consequences.
If such analyses are accepted, they privilege certain approaches to teaching or certain directions in scholarship strongly over others, and they may devalue prior or alternate schools, perspectives, and topics in the field, even perhaps ruling some out of the discipline altogether. Strategies of inclusion or pluralism share the desire for unity but tend to be integrative and tolerant in approach. an example is the concept of multimodality advocated by Janice Lauer and others (for example, graduates of the Carnegie
Mellon cognitive rhetoric program), which entails using a complement of methodologies selected and combined to fit a particular research problem. Many other arguments for the interdisciplinarity of composition (for example,
by Andrea Lunsford [Lindemann and Tate])
espouse a fairly radical pluralism, dismissing problems of disparity as less important than the richness provided by a healthy diversity. Finally,
some proposals for "reunifying" composition studies also express integrative impulses, but these views are not inclusively pluralistic, in that they envision a simpler unity (for example, com--## Section 9

position and literature as "English," or writing and speech as "communication") based on a mythologized past rather than on the confused,
heterogeneous sources and affiliations that now populate composition studies. In the 1980s increasing concerns about the balkanization and apparent incoherence of research in composition studies prompted the formation of the Research Network, an annual meeting at 4Cs that has evolved into an effort to bring different modes of scholarship, and their practitioners, into contact. Speakers and workshop participants have struggled inconclusively through this forum to articulate to one another their distinctive methodological pre-mises and moral visions, to argue the incom-mensurability or complementarity of their views, and to explore the possibilities for devel-oping cross-modal standards for making criti-cal assessments or integrating different forms of knowledge (papers from the 1988 meeting ap-pear in the
Spring 1989 issue of Rhetoric Re-view; see Bazerman et al.). These approaches, seeking neither a dominant paradigm nor an unproblematic pluralism, locate such order as composition may hope for in the ongoing dia-logue itself. (They vary tonally, some scholars emphasizing cooperation and others valuing intrinsically the play and contestation of dif-ference.) These three strategies for navigating the differences and conflicts of composition—
dominance, inclusive pluralism, and dialogue— correspond to different conceptions of disciplinarity and different values accorded to it. Strategies of dominance assume progress in the knowledge-making of composition and at-tempt to control its definition as a discipline,
however broadly, through paradigms of ideal order. Both pluralism and dialogic strategies express a greater tolerance for looseness, fluid-ity, and change,
characterizing composition studies as multiply mediated,
transactional with many other knowledge formations, and dy-namic but not progressing toward any closure. The goal of characterizing (and thus securing the viability) of composition as a discipline, however, remains important to pluralists, whereas some of those promoting dialogue,
especially those who emphasize heterogeneity, diversity,
and struggle as values in themselves, have begun to question the very possibility and desirability of defining composition in anything like disciplinary terms. As recounted by Nystrand et al., the early development of composition studies coincided with a final flowering of structuralist hopes for definitively conceptualizing language, mind, human behavior, and culture. Such themes have energized certain productive research programs within composition and rhetoric (for example, the cognitive process research of Linda Flowers and John
Hayes, David Bartholomae's and Patricia Bizzell's theories of discourse commu-nity as a key to literacy,
social-constructivist views of writing pedagogy). But none of these frameworks have proved definitive, and each is reaching conceptual limits, encountering and indeed prominent scholars in composition studies pursued these notions, others (and sometimes the same ones) consistently described composition as contextualist in nature, shaped fundamentally by its emergence into a postmodern intellectual milieu characterized by themes of antifoundationalism and instabilities of meaning and structure. If composition is to be a "discipline" at all, in this view, it will not be in the traditional sense. A few scholars who identify
"discipline" with a positivist notion of science or with dangers of political conformity and elitism have proposed "antidisciplinary" or

--## Section 10

"postdisciplinary" formulations for the continuing development of composition and rhetoric. Others, understanding a discipline as less an ideal than a mixed logical, pragmatic, rhetorical, and political construct, continue to seek nonessentialist ways of articulating the coherence of its different knowledge projects, teaching practices, and discourse. These views are gaining increasing currency as they parallel developments in other language studies, drawing particularly on the work of the Russian theorist
M.M. Bakhtin. There is a growing sense that, in a disciplinarity so unstable, scholars must construct the field anew and must negotiate their constructions continually with those of others to achieve some common (but always evolving)
understanding of "composition studies." They do not experience themselves as simply inheriting cultural traditions as a set of engrained ideas and values but of being able to choose freely among them, from a past that is indefinitely protean and elastic. Each choice produces a different master narrative of the field and projects a different path to its future. This sense that history is not a burden, not a given, but an open field of possibilities for constantly reinventing oneself (and the past) is a very American one that appears almost unremarked in
Janet Emig's article "The Tacit Tradition: The
Inevitability of a Multi-Disciplinary Approach to Writing Research" (The Web of Meaning:
Essays on Writing, Teaching, Learning, and
Thinking. Ed. Dixie Goswami and Maureen
Butler, 1983), originally presented at the landmark 1979 convention of the Canadian Council of Teachers of English. It gives a distinctively
American cast to the postmodern sensibility of composition studies. Some (like those who long nostalgically for reunification) construct histories on the organic model of tree diagrams, in which composition branches off or separates from a single root or master discipline (such as rhetoric), whose wholeness they constantly seek to restore. Oth-ers have written of composition in nonlinear terms, as core and margins, or as a "blurred genre"
located permanently and indetermi-nately in the border zones between academic fields. But a better metaphor for a discipline that has been unable and increasingly unwill-ingly to fix its self-understanding or settle on a singular history may be the flow of a river fed by many streams, with converging and diverg-ing tributaries and branches, a river in which composition studies is one current intermingling untraceably with others.
Reconstructing pre-cisely the history and origins of that current is meaningless in classical causal terms (as is even the notion of a "mainstream"); what is called for is something more like chaos theory, a way of identifying recurrent patterns. It is important, and enabling to such dis-cussions, that composition studies has in fact achieved a place in the academy—has pro-fessionalized and institutionalized itself, has established the journals,
conventions, and pub-lication channels for sustaining an internal con-versation and communicating with other disci-plines. Scholars who argue for antidisciplinary views of composition can do so safely because of the forums provided them by their predeces-sors; indeed, the very opportunity for them to make this argument presumes more stability and autonomy than they are willing to admit. But they are right that the identity of composi-tion remains a complex and heterogeneous one,

--## Section 11

internally contentious; it does not rest on a single discourse but on a set of overlapping ones, in settings and forums that only partially coincide in their membership and communicate with difficulty. The answers now proposed for both the subject matter of composition studies (for example, expanded and blurred definitions of
"writing") and its self-understanding as a field (for example, postdisciplinary, chaotic) argue that these problems may never be re-solved by a definitive choice or unified frame-work. Instead, composition studies may be seen as distinctive partly in this very feature.
Specifi-cally, it is a field organized by a set of tensions and oppositions that are not incidental or tran-sitory
(that is, resolved by problem-solving) but constitutive.
Tensions may be identified as con-stitutive if they recur as underlying themes structuring and generating many specific de bates, if they are irreducible and irresolvable,
yet fundamental to the disciplinary project. This notion remains to be explored, but a number of candidates come to mind for constitutive tensions:
• conflicts of method, and of their underly-ing epistemologies and values
• the dichotomy of theory and practice
• conflicting notions of the ideal relation-ship and balance between the individual and culture or society, as mediated by language or literacy
• language as knowing versus language as doing, as epistemology or as symbolic action
• ethical conceptions of the disciplinary project as obligated primarily to indi-vidual students or to society
Analysis of how such differences actually constitute a field of topics, activities, problems,
specific dichotomies and oppositions, and so on
(as has begun to occur regarding the relationship between theory and practice) should yield deeper insights into the nature and significance of composition studies. For example, both the conflicts that generated the theory/practice tension and those that center on the relationship of persons to culture as mediated by education reflect specifically American themes (elitism versus populism, individualism versus community, conservation of culture versus innovation,
cultural assimilation versus diversity). Many schemes for unifying composition and rhetoric have attempted to discover some common ground that would identify a particular activity, topic, perspective, or motive as distinctive to the field. While this foundational hope has proven vain in the postmodern milieu, the search can be reconfigured productively as an effort to identify distinctive features as family resemblances, rather than a single common element in a set. In other words, some projects and preoccupations are prototypical in composition studies, although there are many activities of the field that range far from such prototypes; at the same time, the most extreme variants will have some features that overlap with more typical activities, in the same way that individuals in families may be identified as relatives even though they possess no single feature in common. Ultimately, what distinguishes composition studies from other disciplines is the collectivity of such similari-ties and distinctive features, not any one taken alone. If one were to compile a list of such distinc-tive features in composition studies, the follow-ing might be considered for inclusion: • the conception of writing as mediating complex dynamics (for example, various symbol systems and media, or various cognitive processes, the relationship be-tween an individual and language/culture) • a generalized attention to composing both language and action, through an inscribing medium that allows planning,

--## Section 12

self-reflection, and revision • a democratic, perhaps
Utopian, commit-ment to literacy • a rhetorical
(functional or strategic) per-spective on language (as distinct from, say, a formalist or structuralist one) • a developmental orientation and focus on the concrete individual, even when the person is conceived as a nexus for heteroglossic social forces: Similarly, a focus on concrete, particular discourse events or "utterances" •
historically special issues and concerns of earlier composition practice becoming thematic within an expanded subject matter: For example, within the life span of literacy, the adolescent and young adult period when language use becomes critically conscious • reflexivity about the professional activi-ties of members of the discipline • a generalized interest in practices,
espe-cially reflective practice mediated by writing about an activity. The last two features are worthy of special attention. Reflexivity is a characteristic of most contemporary disciplines, which critically ex-amine their own methods of inquiry and genres of discourse. In composition studies this ten-dency is reinforced by several other factors. First, writing is the usual medium for such re-flective thought, and rhetoric is understood now as the general form of inquiry in any field. Sec-ond, from its inception composition took the teaching of its subject matter (writing, rhetoric) as an object of inquiry. That is to say that com-position studied critically its own professional activity, treating its members as moral agents whose activity fell within the domain of its ethiC
cal and intellectual, as well as practical, responsibilities. Later, the activities of teaching were studied in relation to learning and through the characteristic lenses of the field: As reading (response to writing), as rhetoric, as composing, as discourse, as meaning-making, and so on. This duality or reflexivity in the conception of composition as a study has important consequences. First, it means that several regions of responsibility may be defined for composition beyond writing itself, corresponding to the various activities in which its members engage as professionals (that is, by virtue of their disciplinary expertise and roles). These additional regions for reflexive study include not only ( 1 )
teaching but also (2) research and theory as inquiry practices and (3) institutional and professional activities or services like teacher preparation or administration, which are central to the role of composition in higher education.
Second, activities in these regions are recursively related: Each, for example, can be analyzed as a practice of composing or of rhetoric. Third,
each of these activities is as subject to expansion and generalization as writing itself. Thus, for example, scholarly interests in teaching writing generalize to the study of any pedagogy, while thematizing the mediating function of writing in learning any subject, or the role of rhetoric in any field of inquiry. Similarly, an intellectual interest in the administration of writing programs generalizes to the study of institutional practices and problems like academic leadership, curriculum reform, the role of technology in organizing academic and administrative work, or assessment. Finally, each of these ac--## Section 13

tivities engaged in by the professional in composition studies becomes a realm of moral responsibility for the individual and the discipline. The constitutive tensions in composition between activity and reflection, theory and practice, the academy and the quotidian or everyday world, make ethics and politics central issues. This realization has recently begun to swing attention somewhat away from the long preoccupation of composition studies with epis temology and the problem of meaning toward a greater concern for its own practitioners' actions as effective in the world and for the consequences of literacy education as empowering the symbolic and material activities of others.
Practice as Political and Ethical Action
an emphasis on "practice" is probably the single most distinctive feature of composition stud-ies; the discipline's sense of moral purpose in teaching has pointedly shaped its intellectual curiosity and provided a reality check for its discourse and knowledge-making.
(Like all other universal claims about composition stud-ies, however, this one is disputed by scholars who argue that composition studies has ad-vanced in large part by detaching itself from the limitations imposed by developing knowledge for the purposes of writing instruction.) But the commitment to practice, frequently framed as an ideal of democratic education for literacy,
provides a question rather than a common un-derstanding.
The question is, how should that commitment be interpreted and enacted? It has, for example, at various times meant preparing students for public citizenship,
transmitting the finest thoughts and expressions of high culture, teaching mastery of complex (that is, academic)
writing, equipping people to contribute as workers in a high-tech society, and facilitating the development of personal identity. On the other side, some scholars have at-tacked literacy education as inherently oppres-sive and undemocratic in practice. Much schol-arship of the late
1980s and 1990s, influenced by cultural studies,
powerfully reframed this political dimension of composition as a critical project undertaken by members of the discipline (acting as a collectivity of intellectuals)
for re-sisting dominant ideologies and promoting change in the social order toward greater fair-ness, accounting for differences in ethnicity, gender, race, sexuality, and class. These views, sensitive to historical inequities,
demographic changes signaling the coming majority of stu-dents from "minority" cultures, and the nega-tive impact of social tensions on education, nevertheless have provoked critical response, for example, from advocates of revitalized expressivist philosophies emphasizing indi-vidual responsibility and agency. Some scholars have begun to revive ethics in contradistinction to politics as an interpretive frame for contrast-ing and reconciling teachers' responsibilities to students as educators with their responsibilities to society as intellectuals for transmitting cul-ture, developing new knowledge, or promoting social change. One result of the strong ethical and politi-cal "turn" in composition and rhetoric is to foreground the history, organization, and sta-tus of the discipline within the American acad-emy (and schools) as one of "marginalization" or, in Susan Miller's term,
carnivalization (Tex tual Carnivals: The Politics of Composition,
Southern Illinois UP, 1991). Recent scholarship analyzes and critiques the subordination of composition studies to literature in English de--## Section 14

partments, the exploitation of part-time and non-tenure track faculty (who teach a huge proportion of writing classes in higher education, along with teaching assistants), and the relationship of these to an historical "feminization" of composition. These studies are redeemed from what sometimes appears to be self-absorption, parochialism, or self-aggrandizement by their attempt to connect academic and popular attitudes toward composition studies to its "everyday" or quotidian nature (for example, in valuing student texts or studying ordinary discourse), its longstanding commitment to active student learning and to the needs of nontraditional students, and other themes within composition scholarship and teaching
(for example, in radical or critical pedagogy)
that put it in tension with the academy's elitism and ivory-tower mentality, or that reflect and address conflicts or problems in the larger society. A related political issue is the status of practitioners as intellectual and moral agents within composition studies. Many have attacked the assumption underlying the composition revolution that research and theory could ultimately rationalize and control practice. Instead, they have argued for the autonomy of teachers and their independent roles as inquirers, curriculum designers, and decision-makers,
along with their students, in daily classroom interactions. These views have been promoted in part through the "teacher research" movement in the schools and in some college writing programs. Despite the emergence of purer, nonpeda gogical research, no one in the field is entirely exempt from the question "How is your work related to practice?" Initially, "practice" referred only to teaching, but it has acquired greater resonance. Like concepts of writing,
practice (often "critical" or "reflective" practice, sometimes "praxis") has expanded its reference, becoming a generic term for symbolic activities and for professional and everyday activities that share with rhetoric such features as uncertainty, problem-formulation, design,
artistry, strategic rather than rule-governed decision-making, and feedback. This conception helps to ensure the unique reflexivity of compoKirsch, Gesa, and Patricia A. Sullivan, eds. Methods and
Methodology in Composi-tion Research. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1992.
Lauer, Janice. "Composition Studies: Dappled Discipline."
Rhetoric Review 3 (1984): 20–29.
Lindemann, Erika, and Gary Tate, eds. an Introduction to
Composition Studies. New York: Oxford UP, 1991.
Moran, Michael G., and Ronald Lunsford, eds. Research in
Composition and Rhetoric: A Bibliographic Sourcebook.
Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1984.
North, Stephen M. The Making of Knowl-edge in Composition:
Portrait of an Emerging Field. Upper Montclair, NJ:
Boynton/Cook, 1987.
Nystrand, Martin, et al. "Where Did Compo-sition Studies
Come From? an Intellec-tual History." Written Communication
10 (1993): 267 –333.
Phelps, Louise Wetherbee. Composition as a Human Science:
Contributions to the Self-Understanding of a Discipline.
New York: Oxford UP, 1988.
